---
title: Random Method
---
## The Random Method

In JavaScript, there is a built in Object called *Math* that contains many useful mathematical functions. One of the most commonly used methods is *Math.random()*, to generate random numbers.

### Generating a random floating point number between 0 and 1

The *Math.random()* method will return a floating point (decimal) number greater than or equal to 0 and less than (but never equal to) 1. In other words *0 <= x < 1*. For example:

```JavaScript
console.log(Math.random());
// 0.7069207248635578

console.log(Math.random());
// 0.765046694794209

console.log(Math.random());
// 0.14069121642698246
```

(Of course, the numbers returned will be different every time. This will be assumed for all following examples - different results will happen on each pass.)

### Generating a random floating point number between 0 and a specified max

Usually we do not need random numbers between 0 and 1 - we need larger numbers or even integers.

For example, if we wanted a random floating point number between 0 and 10, we could use:

```JavaScript
var x = Math.random()*10;

console.log(x);
// 4.133793901445541
```

### Generating a random floating point number within a range

If we needed a random floating point number that ranges between two specific numbers, we could do something like this:

```JavaScript
var min = 83.1;
var max = 193.36;

var x = Math.random()*(max - min)+min;

console.log(x);
// 126.94014012699063
```

### Generating a random integer between 0 and a max

Often we need integers. To do this we will have to use some other methods from the *Math* object, *Math.floor()* (rounds down to the nearest integer) and *Math.ceil()* (rounds up to the nearest integer).

For example, if we needed to select randomly from an array of 10 elements, we would need a random number between 0 and 9 inclusive (remember that arrays are zero indexed).

```JavaScript
var x = Math.floor(Math.random()*10);

console.log(x);
// 7
```

(Remember that *Math.random()* will never return exactly 1, so _Math.random()*10_ will never return exactly 10. This means that after rounding down, the result will always be 9 or less.)

### Generating a random integer between 1 and a max

If we need a random number with the minimum number being 1 (for example picking a random day in January) you could use the *Math.ceil()* method.

```JavaScript
var x = Math.ceil(Math.random()*31);

console.log(x);
// 23
```

Another way would have been to use our previous function (using *Math.floor()*) and add 1 to it:

```JavaScript
var x = Math.floor(Math.random()*31)+1;

console.log(x);
// 17
```

### Generating a random integer within a range

Lastly, occasionally we need random integer between two specific integers. For example, if we are trying to pick raffle tickets and we know the numbers of the lowest and largest number:

```JavaScript
var min = 1718;
var max = 3429;

var x = Math.floor(Math.random()*(max-min+1)+min);

console.log(x);
//2509
```

### How random is Math.random()?

It may be pointed out that the number returned by *Math.random()* is a pseudo-random number as no computer can generate a truly random number, that exhibits randomness over all scales and over all sizes of data sets. However, the pseudo-random number generated by *Math.random()* is more than sufficient for the needs of nearly any program we may write. The not-truly-randomness only becoming apparent in astronomically large number sets or when uncommonly precise decimals are needed.

#### More Information:
[MDN documentation on *Math.random()*](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math/random)
